If you record at maximum,
or you record at minimum, I believe we're ready to
go.
What I usually start off with is a little
biographical statement. What's my name? Well, I
already gave him your name and everything on the
beginning of that beforehand. But you already
gave your biographical statement to Billy
Halford in the other interview. So unless there's
anything you'd like to add in terms of change.
Changes since then? Not really. Same old thing.
And you also talked about how you came to tease, but
I would like you to redo that one for us this time.
Oh, I see. I was at General Dynamics, yeah, when I
came here. I guess Charlie Rodenberger invited me
to come make a speech. I don't know. I did that. But
in talking to Fred Benson, I complained about the
fact that there wasn't a space program at A&M. And
like Fred Benson does, he says, well, won't you
come fix that? So that's how I came here and started
the space program. There was one grant that they
had. One grant, yeah. John Calhoun had gotten a
grant, the first NASA grant in the state of Texas.
And I guess that grant ran until about two years
ago. Was it continuous grant? It was almost 20
years. He got it in 62, and I came here in 63, but they
hadn't even done anything with it. They just had
it. So you came specifically to head the Space
Technology Division, and it was created when you
came? Right.
What type of space research was done during the
60s?
I've got that, yeah. Have you seen this? I've got a
copy of it. Okay, that will give you... We tried to
broaden it out into the whole university, and to
some extent we did, but it still was, I'd say,
three-quarters engineering. Really, Rice took
over the space science part of it. And our program
was primarily engineering, although there were
some over in the science college. Of course, our
wind tunnel was used by NASA throughout and still
is. Was it used during the 60s? When did you revamp
it? Yeah, it was in the late 60s that they started
using the wind tunnel.
work on reentry projects. But it got heavily used
when they started the space shuttle design. But I
knew it had been there, and you'd said that when you
came it was filled with hay. When was it that it was
cleared out? Oh, it was cleared. We got the hay out
of it in a couple of years.
But I wasn't sure if it had just laid dormant until
the shuttle program, or if it had been in use. No, it
had been in use before that. Dr. Strickland, who
died, was in our space, heavily sponsored by NASA,
mainly in structures research and nose cone
re-entry
research. There have been few changes in T's
administration since you've been here. Yes.
I guess for Let's see, I got here in 63, and I was made
associate director by Benson and Ludeke when
Ludeke was there. See, he was associate director,
and then was made acting president. And I can't
remember exactly when that was. But it probably
was late 60s or 70s. So I've been associate
director for probably 15 years. 70
is when you became associate assistant in 63.
Okay, and associate in 70. Yeah, that makes sense.
Were you here when Cahan was still here? Cahan, he
was with the Research Foundation. Oh, Cahan.
Cahan, okay. Cahan. No, I wasn't. He left when I got
here. Did you notice any major change in the
direction T's took in research when Rudder died?
No. I have seen no major change in T's type or thrust
of research since I've been here, and I still don't
see any. What do you see as the major thrust? It's
applied research. CTs is a separate state agency,
and its real role as far as its creators, and that's
the state legislature, is industrial
development, not higher education. So most of our
research has been applied. It has been heavily
associated with Texas industry and national
industry to some extent. But not like Harvard or
Yale. We're very proud of doing applied research.
We do basic, but I don't ever remember any strong
thrust to do basic research. Nor do I see any now.
With the changes in upper administration that
you've the changes between reporting to the
chancellor and the president. Has that changed
your roles? My role? No. Definitely. I've been
very fortunate.
Benson is an absolutely gorgeous boss. He lets you
do your job. And I don't see why it's important.
They're both pretty much alike. And I have run the
program. And they've done the politicking, which
is the way I want it. So by running the program, what
do you mean? All of the division had to report for
me. Has that been that way since you became an
associate? Always has been that way. Was it that
way in the 60s, too, when you were assistant? No,
not when I was assistant. That occurred. See, at
one time... TTI reported to me also. But see, I sit
in the line. And that's the way I'm going to play.
Who do you deal with outside the system? Outside
the A&M system? Well, I have up until six or seven
years ago. dealt with Washington a great deal, and
all the sponsors, NSF, and the Department of
Defense. See, I was in the Army 20 years. It's
incredible.
In the last six years, I haven't done that. Dr. Bain
has done most of that. So in the recent past, I have
strictly run the Engineering Experiment
Station. And done very little dealing outside the
system. I know in the 60s. In the early days, of
course, I was the leg man to get the Tate Building
built. So I spent a couple of years in Washington
almost. Whose idea was the Tate Building?
Winardi.
His original idea didn't happen. He wanted it to be
an activation analysis building. That was his
main interest. That was his claim to fame. But that
wasn't broad enough to sell a building in Nassau.
So really, this report was a dedication to the
building. But who got the building? Then you doubt
about that. Only Teague got the building. All I did
was make it reasonable for Nassau to give it to us.
But had it not been for Teague, it wouldn't be
there. I think everybody would say. But they had a
reasonable reason to give it to us. According to
letters written back and forth to the president at
that time, in 1963 when they appointed you
assistant director, you were supposed to be the
wonder child of grant money. There's no such thing
as the wonder child of grant money. Do you know how
you get grant money? How do you get it? Very, very
simple. You find a man who can do the job that
somebody wants done and has some money. And then
you arrange to get them face-to-face, the two
people who technically know the details of what's
going on. Now, to get them face-to-face takes some
doing, and I'm rather good at that. But nobody can
get somebody else a grant, unless it's politics,
and you can't live on politics. What gets you a
grant is to... He's technically competent to do a
job a man wants done who's got some money to pay for.
It's that simple. But you've got to get the two
together. You've got to get them together. Is that
what TEAS does, in your opinion? Yeah, that's what
TEAS does. TEAS knows the talent throughout
engineering, and it knows the problems
throughout the country. And you hear, well...
Right now, for example, the Air Force very much
wants to apply artificial intelligence to
manufacturing. We know that because Dick Thomas
is on a committee of the Air Force that's working on
that. And then we know that Don Phillips in
industrial is an expert in that. And then the two
get like they did two weeks ago. And man, it
happens. It's almost a cinch. It is difficult.
Well, you've got to know it. If you weren't... If
you've got talented people, getting grants is no
problem.
We don't have a money problem. We have a people
problem. We need more people. Need more people in
the university willing to do research? Well, see,
engineering has been growing so fast. So you have a
combination of problems. One, the teaching loads
are unbelievable, which makes it difficult to
talk some guy into doing research when he's
teaching more than he should anyway. And you can't
do that for too long. And I think that's coming
around. But for the last couple of years, it's been
pretty bad. But it's recognized, and once it is,
and the people who can fix it know it's a problem, it
gets fixed. But it takes a long time. Did you have
the same problem with teaching loads in the 60s?
They were pretty good about giving you release
time? Yeah. See, the difference, really, in
engineering, if you are doing research, you go off
of this budget. the teaching budget, and you go on
to the research budget. So if there's any cheating
going on, it becomes real obvious. And this
arrangement, once you, you're always gonna have
these problems in a growth pattern because
there's an inertia in what the legislature does
and what we can do. But once you recognize the
problem, it can be fixed because we have the
organization to do it. Some people don't. We do.
Did you notice, not here at T's because you weren't
here by then, in the late 50s with Sputnik and you
were in the Department of Defense, did that really
make a difference? Sputnik was way before the late
50s. I was at White Sands Proving Ground when
Sputnik went up. Are those 57? Okay. 57? I'm sorry,
but you're right. But I wasn't here. I was at White
Sands. Yeah, right. But did you notice there that
money started being freed up for research? Yeah,
it did. Have there been any other... events like
that that you remember since you've been here that
have caused money for particular types of
research? It
definitely has occurred during the Reagan
administration, particularly for basic
research. See, the kind of research engineers do
is not nearly as hard to find money for as the kind of
research the science college does. It's just
human nature. They can see an end product in what
we're doing. And they're willing to put the money
up if they need the end product. But since Regan
took office, and you can read this almost any
place, particularly writings by the head of the
National Science Foundation, he certainly has
a somewhat bias, but I do know money for basic
research has increased about 50% in the last two or
three years. And we're just beginning to feel
that. And we do need to do more basic research, but
people haven't been willing to pay for it. I do see a
trend that they may be willing to pay for it. But
what we do, somebody's got to pay for
it.
What was the, I don't know if you know, but the
purpose of... And I'll tell you why Reagan's doing
that. He knows this country's in deep trouble
economically. The Japanese are skinning us. The
Germans are skinning us. And the reason he's doing
it is that he feels that will improve our economic
posture. And he's right. It will. It'll take a
while to do it. You've got to have the knowledge.
And you'll also notice the National Science
Foundation right now is putting way more emphasis
on engineering research than they have in the
past. They plan to quadruple the money spent on
engineering in the next three years for the same
reason, economics. So there's more money for
basic science research, but... Both in
engineering and the sciences. And engineering is
being emphasized all over the place because this
is where you're going to improve the economics.
We've forgotten how to build things cheap that
work.
You haven't seen any of the cyclical moves before
while you were here? There was a very definite
downtrend in the overall research budget. up
until about three years ago. I guess you'd say from
70 to 79.
Before that, 60 to 70, there was money everywhere,
and they didn't know what to do with it. They're
cyclic, yeah. It was a general slow downturn. It
wasn't any major crash of no funds available. I'm
hoping that right now there's some sense being put
into it. but also a definite increase in funds
available. There's no question but what Texas
does not get its fair share. Of national money?
That's right. They do not. For example, there's
not a national laboratory in the state. There's
three in New Mexico. National laboratory? Los
Alamos. Oh,
okay. That's right. You already... I think you
already stated your view on the role of TEAS in
education, but I'd like to know. My view on what?
TEAS role in education? TEAS basic role, as far as
the legislature is concerned, who, by the way, has
the money that we get from the state. And that is
only about 20% of our budget. Their opinion of what
TEAS is supposed to do is, to improve the economic
stature of the state of Texas. And if somebody out
there goes and tells them, yeah, that's what
they're doing, we've got no problems. But if
somebody out there goes and tells them, they're
just paying graduate students to go to school,
we're in deep trouble. That's why when we hire a
graduate student, he produces something. And he
works the hours he's supposed to work. on what we
feel will benefit the state, not to get him an
education. But that just also happens to be, in
most cases, a byproduct of the whole process. Not
only does he get a realistic job to work on,
something that he'll really learn something
from, but it makes him responsible. I don't
believe in giving a kid some money to go to school.
First of all, you dream up a project for him. It's
unrealistic. You can't kid these kids. Pardon the
pun. They know when they're producing something
worthwhile. And they want to. And that is why the
way we do it is both an advantage to the state and to
the kids' education. What about the role of
teasing, disseminating information? It is
absolutely worthless to do research, write it up,
and put it on the shelf. You've got to get it used and
out on the street. And I tell you who's a little bit
better than Tease at doing that. That's TTI. What
they do gets put on the highway and saves lives. And
we've learned a lot from them on how to get it out and
get it used. One outlet is this Invent program,
which is to take the results of research and
actually start businesses. And we have no
apologies for doing that whatsoever. What about
the publications and the change in publications?
I know this has been the major improvement in T's
under Porter. a major there have been many but he
has done a gorgeous job and so has penny he's backed
her and she's done it yeah and really getting
worthwhile stuff up to then i paid for a crummy deal
that frankly wasn't any good and i think penny is
just getting started I think give her two more
years, I'll give her three. Key's publications
will be equivalent to Harvard and MIT, but in a
different vein, in fact, a much more useful vein
than theirs. But we will be the technical
publication for the state of Texas. Now, you're
talking about the thing you paid for? You're
talking about the technical bulletin? I'm
talking about whatever penny puts together. No, I
mean... My windows may become... Yeah. Or it may be
something else. I'm talking... I meant
historically, that the thing you said you weren't
proud of... Oh, we did a...
Did you ever know Horn? I'm interviewing him
tomorrow afternoon. Horn? Well, Horn ran
publications for Tees for years, and... Until
about the time you came. Yeah. And it was so bad that
I just shut it down. It wasn't worth the money. And
then we got a little bit ashamed of that and put out a
quarterly, very technical, unsexy book.
It was technically sound. But I doubt anybody ever
looked at it. I have. The other flame cover, just
weird. But you started that in 72. You started that
back up again. That was because you felt you were
shamed into it? Well, we weren't publishing
anything.
Yeah, I'm shamed into it. What does that do for the
visibility of the organization? or would help
some with a limited clientele. What would happen,
I'm sure, is someone who was extremely interested
technically in one of the three or four articles
would probably get some good out of it. But that's a
pretty limited audience. Because you can't, it
can't be broad enough. And we didn't have anybody
knew how to do it. This is the truth. I didn't. Is
there a particular time period in Tees that you
feel was the low point? In Tees?
No. When I got here in Tees, I had about less than a
half million dollar budget. And the
administration consisted of Mr. Blevins, who
worked for a bank in town, And the kids go blind, and
that's all. And it has been a rather reasonable,
steady growth. I don't think you'll find any dips
anywhere in it. I don't believe there was ever a
fallback year. It's been going along on the
average about 15, 20% a year. I don't recall any low
spots. The
changes
from the 60s to the 70s,
Dean Benson is characterizing as the 60s as a
building parade of resources and the 70s a
utilization of those. Is that the same way you
would characterize them? The 60s, see I got here in
63 and I had a fairly limited role until I was made
associate director.
I guess I would say there just wasn't a critical
mass until about 70. By that I mean you had enough
going to be flexible enough to ride out any
problems. And that's the key to teeth. It's very
flexible. And we shut things down if they don't
work. Such as? Such as the remote sensing center.
We shut it down two weeks ago. Not because it was, it
was extremely good for But right now, things are
changing, and the people involved would rather be
involved in electrical engineering.
But that flexibility is key to it, and our people
are flexible.
Well, you've seen how environmental goes up and
then it went down. The people involved didn't
change, and they went over to this strategic
petroleum reserve, and that's going to go away.
But those people will be, they'll look ahead,
they'll start in hazardous waste studies, you
watch me, and they won't run out of money, and they
won't run out of a job, but they'll shift. They
can't change their talents, but they can change
what they're applying to. And this happens all the
time. I know the interdisciplinary programs have
expanded rapidly in the last few years. Yeah.
That, of course, is the part that takes the most
putting together. But it also is the part that can
take on bigger jobs.
You may look at ME, industrial, EE, and not realize
that when you see ME, there's very few programs in
ME that are just ME. ME may be taking the lead role,
but there'll be EEs involved, like in the robotics
program, industrial engineers involved. And
then you go over to the EE program and you see
microelectronics. Will there be chemical
engineers involved? EE just happens to be taking
the lead role. So in my mind, those programs
labeled MEE are just as interdisciplinary as the
others. And they have to be. Have they been that way
ever since you've been here? That has been my
greatest contribution. I knew it had to happen.
See, I ran research at Aberdeen Proving Grounds in
White Sands. And there's nothing worthwhile you
can do with one discipline, in my opinion. There's
no such thing as ME research or EE research. It's
impossible. So that sense of cooperation is what
you've tried to work with? That is why engineering
at A&M is different from most places. Now, MFT can
do the same thing, probably a little better. But
there's not many schools that can. Was there
interdisciplinary cooperation before you
became associate director? Some.
The problem just wasn't that big. It's got to reach
the critical mass before you can do that.
And that's what's fun. When do you think it reached
the critical mass? Oh, I'd say, yeah, that's
probably 74 or 75. And that being having the talent
and the equipment? And what really, when people
start coming to you, then you know you're there.
Now this hasn't happened in all areas, but it's
happened in many areas. We really don't have to
look for research in turbomachinery anymore.
What we do in remote sensing, we didn't have to look
for it. And then that sort of tailed off. So you have
to shift with it. There were, oh, eight years ago,
we didn't have to look for any remote sensing
research. But that has changed. So we're
changing. What about the data processing center?
I know it was divorced from an organization. It
never should have been under TEAS in the first
place. The only reason it was is TEAS was the only
place that could underwrite it. It just so
happened that there wasn't a lot of underwriting
needed. But when you get up to a $2 million and $3
million budget, Somebody's gotta be able to, in
case there's a million dollar loss one year, cover
it, because the people gotta get paid. So the only
reason it was ever in Teves was the ability to
underwrite it. And also, as I was near when they
started, it could have been considered, at that
time, more research than service. But then it got
to be strictly service. It should definitely have
left Tees many years ago. But they couldn't get the
act together and find a way to underwrite it. They
finally did. And we were very happy to say sign art
to you fellows. Oh, it was a great bunch of people
and they did a gorgeous job. But it really wasn't
our job to provide computing to the whole
university. It was a I wrote his research. Are
there any other? And there was a pain in the neck.
Are there any other divisions that have been pains
in the neck that you'd like to? Nuclear Science
Center. That's what I was going to ask you about.
That's been changed somewhat a little in the last
few years too, hasn't it? Not really. It's been
losing about a quarter of a million dollars a year,
as long as I can remember. But it's now going
through the... Yes, right. It did report directly
to me and not report to the department.
Is that at their instigation or at T's
instigation? Our instigation. What will that do,
hopefully?
Well, it hadn't worked the other way. just a new
experiment the real hope was see there had been no
nuclear research in engineering up until well
when Dr. Erdman came the hope was that he would
increase the nuclear engineering research
program to the point that it would justify the
reactor most of the research at the reactor has
been done at The use of it has been by the science
college and agriculture and vet medicine, not
engineering. So what we've been doing is
underwriting their research program about a
quarter of a million dollars a year, which is OK.
But we just seem not. So we're stirring around and
trying to find a better arrangement. And whether
we will or not, I don't know the answer, really. We
don't have enough data at this point. I don't even
really know how much these other colleges are
interested in it. They obviously aren't
interested enough to pay for it. I mean, if you're
not going to make them pay for it, why are they going
to volunteer? If it's to the benefit of the whole,
we can live with that. But is it? I don't know. I'm
trying to find out, and I'll bet I'll take it.
That's the present project, right? I know that,
I'm trying to remember the name of the
fluid measurement division or something. Well,
now that goes on in aerospace. No, it's the, I can't
remember, Hall, Kenneth Hall's? Oh,
thermodynamic research. Thermodynamics, okay,
yeah. I talked to him last week, and he was telling
me about the fact that TEAS had essentially bought
them from the Research Foundation. Are there
other organizations that you've done that with?
Well, we sure bailed them out. And it worked. And it
absolutely worked. No, I don't guess so. That was
about as bad a deal as I ever got. It turned around
pretty fast, though. Yeah, it turned around real
fast. And I blame that all on Dick Hall. Dick Hall's
a good man. That was just a risk you took? It's not
one you generally have taken before? No, it isn't
normal.
The fan testing research has been around forever
and ever and ever. Yeah, see that's another thing
we're changing. Okay, how are you changing that?
Well, for years it's been strictly, it does most of
the testing of air moving machines in this
country. And it is accepted by all of the industry
as something they believe. If we put out the data,
they believe it. In other words, if we say this fan
will move this much air per minute, then they
believe us. They don't have to check it or
anything. And we want to continue that. But that's
not research. So what I've done is turn that whole
program over to the ME department, because we have
a very fine opportunity now to really do research
in HVAC, which is heating, ventilating, and air
conditioning. And there is an organization that
wants to join with us and build a program like we
have in turbo machinery. And this was done. by ME
people and industrial and led by ME. So the attempt
to utilize that facility, because there's a lot of
stuff out there, better rather than just testing
things. We have turned it over to ME and say, OK,
it's yours. Get on with some research, and here's
some resources to get you going. So we're just
trying to broaden it from a testing program to a
testing and research program. But still part of
TEAS? Yes. Through the ME department?
Yeah. In the interdisciplinary aspects, Invent
is one of the big- Hot deal. Yeah, the hot deal of the
time. And from other interviews I've had, part of
the problem that they're coming across with
Invent is that it's not a win-win situation in
terms of the need for publications from the
faculty standpoint. Is that something that
you're finding with Invent, or is that the problem
with other teachers? It's peculiar. This need for
publications is
wrong i mean there is a need the need is to get
promoted right and in my opinion when you publish
something it is immediately worthless you can't
sell it you're giving it away right if i patent it
it's a different matter so i'm not that hung up on
publication but at the moment at least And it seems
to have gotten worse in the last three or four
years. This hang-up on publication is copying
Harvard and Yale. They do it and that for 40 years.
It gets 400 years. So we're copying them, or trying
to, rather than do our own thing. I think it'll ease
off. That heat will go away and become reasonable
again, as it was under Benson.
There was never that fear in the faculty. I know
many who did real well and never published
anything, but produced a lot. I think that'll go
away. It's a trend at the moment. It won't last. Not
here. It is a problem. It surfaces and is more
visible in the event. But it's a problem in many
ways. But anytime you set something in concrete
and start counting something, you know, did you do
one this move? You're crazy. Everything won't
work. And that'll go away. That's just people. Do
you think it'll... It'll get reasonable again.
Certainly we want to publish, but we don't want
to... run everybody's life on how many, whether
they published two this month or only one. That's
dumb. But it's a fear in the faculty that if they
involve their self within VET at the moment is
negative. I tell you how I can fix that real quick.
Pay them a little bit more money. Then the fear will
go away. You're not going to let it stop inventing.
No, no way. It will not stop inventing. I guarantee
you that. The Research Foundation, you— I was a
member of that austere group at one time. It was a
very fine organization. It had a few problems. It
only had one, really. It cost too much. Is it living
up to its expenses? Is it paying for itself? Their
cost of doing what they do, percentage-wise, see,
what they do is take a certain percent of the
indirect cost. Are you saying they could cut
costs? Yes, and do the same thing. And also, in the
case of the foundation and fees, there's a
duplication there that needs to be studied. and
either the duplication removed from TEAS or from
the foundation. There's not nearly that much
duplication in what they do for the university in
that the university doesn't have much of a
research accounting or management or anything
like that. So what the, my feeling is the
foundation is geared to serve the university and
it's over geared to serve TEAS. Another solution
would be for us to cut back on our county, and we're
willing to do that. If a study says that's what you
ought to do, nobody's ever looked at it. And one of
these days, the federal government's going to
look at it and say, you're indirect costs are too
high because you're duplicating. And you people
fix it, or we're going to. So we better fix it. And
we're thinking about doing it. It took me a lot of
reading to understand the relationship. But the
foundation's valuable. For example, they do all
the negotiating with the federal agencies for us.
And they know how to do it. And there's always
quirks with the different federal agencies that
they understand. If we didn't have them, we'd have
to step up to do that. So they're valuable to us. I
don't think they're quite as valuable as they
cost. That's the problem. And it's not. Anything
can't be fixed. Do they deal only with federal
guys? Mainly. Federal and industry. They do no
dealings with the state. And see, we do a lot of
research for the state. So we have to have a staff to
do that. They're primarily with the federal
government.
Have you noticed a change in funding in terms of
percentage, federal, industry? Not in our case.
Not really. Perhaps industry has increased
modestly,
and federal percentage has gone down slightly. I
like the way we have it. We probably have the
highest percentage of industry support of any
engineering complex in the country. Quite a bit.
Probably twice as much. Which
is real nice. I'll take a job with industry any day
before I will the federal government. And then if
you want to look at the federal government,
there's good ones and bad ones. The best one is DOD.
They know what they're doing. They do their
homework. And if you do a good job, they know it. And
there's less chupac type stuff. I guess the worst
one up to date is NSF. They don't know what they're
doing. But I believe they may be learning. That's
not really true. I hope. They finally decided
engineering's important. The
changes in
TEAS, we're also trying to look at how their change
compared to the other engineering experience
stations in the nation. And I know from my research
that there was, until the mid-50s,
a journal of the Engineering Division of Land
Grant the association land grants. Is there
anything?